Overview
In this project, you will create a complete, reproducible data workflow using the Python skills you developed in your Nanodegree. You will load a dataset, clean and transform it, explore it, visualize it, and communicate your findings in a clear and professional way.

This project uses only the tools you already know:

Python
NumPy
Pandas
Matplotlib / Seaborn
Git & GitHub
Jupyter Notebooks
You are not training machine learning models yet. This project focuses on building the workflow that later ML, Deep Learning, Generative AI, and Agentic AI projects will build on. As part of this work, you will reference one provided scholarly article on reproducible data science to support at least one workflow or design decision, and you will identify and cite at least one additional scholarly source that supports your analysis or methodological choices.

Why This Project Matters
A clean and reproducible data workflow is the first step in almost every AI or data science project. Employers expect professionals to:

Write modular, reusable code
Work with real datasets
Clean and explore data
Create meaningful visualizations
Document their work clearly
Use Git for version control
What You Will Build
You will create:

A Jupyter Notebook with a complete data workflow following a clear structure.
A README File explaining your project, how to run it, and how it connects to future AI work.
A written summary with academic citations and a References section using the template provided.
A GitHub Repository with multiple commits and at least one additional branch to demonstrate professional version control.

Local Machine Instructions
Before you begin the project, make sure your environment is set up correctly. This will help you avoid errors and ensure your notebook runs smoothly from start to finish.

Install Python 3.x
You can use any recent version of Python 3 (3.9 or higher).
If you have already completed the Nanodegree projects, you should already have this installed.
Install Jupyter Notebook or JupyterLab You may use any of the following:
Jupyter Notebook
JupyterLab
VS Code with the Jupyter Extension
Anaconda (includes Jupyter by default) To install Jupyter via pip:
   pip install notebook
To start Jupyter Notebook:

   jupyter notebook
Install Required Python Libraries Make sure the following libraries are installed:
NumPy
Pandas
Matplotlib
Seaborn Install them with:
   pip install numpy pandas matplotlib seaborn
If you are using Anaconda, these will already be available.

Install and Set Up Git Make sure Git is installed and connected to your GitHub account. Check your Git version:
git --version
If Git is not installed, download it here: https://git-scm.com/downloads(opens in a new tab) You should be able to:

Clone your project repository
Create branches
Commit and push your work to GitHub
Validate Your Environment Open a new Jupyter Notebook and run this code:
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
If the imports work with no errors, your environment is ready. Next, test that you can load your dataset:

df = pd.read_csv("your_dataset.csv")
df.head()
If you see the first few rows of your dataset, everything is set up correctly.

Create Your requirements.txt File Before submitting your project, generate a reproducibility file:
pip freeze > requirements.txt
This file lists all the packages in your environment so someone else can run your notebook exactly as you did.

Project Instructions
Follow the tasks below in order. Each task builds on the previous one. Complete each task before moving to the next.

What You Will Submit:
data_workflow.ipynb
module_summary.pdf
requirements.txt
README.md
A GitHub repository link showing multiple commits and at least one additional branch
Task 1 — Choose Your Dataset
Begin by selecting the dataset you will work with in this project. You may choose from the recommended options below, or use your own dataset as long as it meets the project requirements.

Recommended Datasets
Titanic - Machine Learning from Disaster(opens in a new tab)
This data is located under the DATA folder


If you choose your own dataset, it must:
Contain at least 200 rows
Have at least 5 columns
Be a CSV or other tabular file
Be safe and appropriate for academic use
After selecting your dataset, download it and place it in the same folder as your notebook.

Task 2 — Create Your GitHub Repository
Create a new GitHub repository named: ai-programming-foundations-project
Clone it to your local machine.
Create at least one additional branch for development work.
Make regular commits as you complete each task.
Your repository should now contain at least two branches.

Task 3 — Set Up Your Notebook
Create a new Jupyter Notebook named data_workflow.ipynb.
In the first Markdown cell, include:
Your name
The dataset you selected
A short 2–3 sentence description of the project
Your notebook should now have a clear and complete introduction.

Task 4 — Import Libraries and Load Your Dataset
Add code cells that import the required libraries:

import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
Then load your dataset:

df = pd.read_csv("your_dataset.csv")
df.head()
If the first rows display correctly, your data is loaded.

Task 5 — Build Your Data Cleaning Functions
Write at least two cleaning functions. Each function must include a docstring explaining what it does.

Apply your functions to your dataset.

Task 6 — Write an Exploratory Analysis Function
Create one or more exploratory analysis (EDA) functions such as:

Summary statistics
Grouped or filtered views
Correlation checks
Run your EDA function and review the output.

Task 7 — Create Three Visualizations
Create at least three visualizations using Matplotlib or Seaborn. Each visualization must include:

A title
Labeled axes
Task 8 — Write Your Summary and Interpretation
Add a Markdown section that describes, in complete sentences:

What you learned from the dataset
Interesting patterns or insights
Limitations or assumptions
Anything surprising or unclear
Task 9 — Create Your README File (Short Run Instructions Only)
Create a file named README.md in your GitHub repo. Your README must include:
Project Description (2–4 sentences)
What you built
What dataset you used (name + link)
How to Run the Project
How to install dependencies
How to open and run data_workflow.ipynb
Create requirements.txt
Include the command:
pip install -r requirements.txt

pip freeze > requirements.txt
Important: Do not put long explanations or citations in the README. All detailed explanations and academic citations belong in module_summary.pdf. A reviewer should be able to follow your README and run your notebook successfully.

Task 10 — Summary & Interpretation (with Academic Citations)
Each capstone module requires a written summary supported by academic citations. For this module, you must submit a separate written report.

Create a file named module_summary.pdf. As part of this report, you must read and cite the required peer-reviewed article: Reproducible Data Science with Python: An Open Learning Resource(opens in a new tab) on reproducible data science.

You must use this article to support at least one workflow, reproducibility, or design decision you made in this project. In addition, you must find and cite at least one other peer-reviewed scholarly source that supports a relevant best-practice claim in your report. Both sources must appear as in-text citations and in the References section of module_summary.pdf.

Your report must include the following sections:

Overview (2–4 sentences)
Explain what you built and what dataset you used. Include the dataset name and link.

Dataset Description (3–6 sentences)
Describe what the dataset represents, its size (rows/columns), and the key variables you focused on.

Workflow Description (high level)
Explain your workflow steps at a high level:

Ingestion
Cleaning
Exploratory analysis
Visualizations
Summary
Key Decisions and Assumptions
Explain the most important choices you made and why they were appropriate for your dataset:

Cleaning choices
What you focused on in EDA
What each plot was designed to show
Tip: When you make a best-practice claim (for example, about missing data, reproducibility, bias, or visualization choices), support it with a citation.

Results and Interpretation
Summarize the most important patterns you found. Refer to your notebook outputs and visualizations (for example: Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3).

Responsible Practice (Bias and Data Quality)
Explain where cleaning or data handling could introduce bias or misleading results in your dataset, and what you did (or would do next) to reduce that risk.

Reproducibility
Explain how someone else could rerun your work. Mention requirements.txt and your Git workflow (commits/branching).

Sources and Citations (Required)
Include a references list. Use citations in the report whenever you make a general claim about best practices.

Acceptable sources include:
Official documentation (Python, Pandas, Matplotlib, Git)
University or textbook resources
Peer-reviewed articles or conference papers
Submission Instructions
Make sure your submission includes:

GitHub Repository
Multiple commits showing progress
At least one additional branch
All project files included
Notebook
Dataset loads correctly
Two cleaning functions with docstrings
One EDA function
Three labeled visualizations
Summary section
No execution errors
README
Project description
Reproducibility instructions
How to run data_workflow.ipynb
How to install dependencies (pip install -r requirements.txt)
requirements.txt
Created using:

pip freeze > requirements.txt
Written summary report with in-text citations
References section (consistent citation style)
At least 2 credible sources (at least 1 scholarly source)
Report content grounded in your dataset, code, and visualizations
If everything on the checklist is complete, your project is ready to submit.

Rubric
Use this project rubric to understand and assess the project criteria.

Untitled Section
Criteria	Submission Requirements
Notebook Execution

Notebook runs top-to-bottom without errors; all cells execute successfully.

Data Ingestion

Dataset loads correctly using Pandas; first rows are displayed.

Data Cleaning Functions

At least two cleaning functions defined and used; each includes a clear docstring.

Exploratory Analysis Function

At least one EDA function defined and used (summary statistics, grouping, filtering, etc.).

Visualizations

At least three visualizations using Matplotlib/Seaborn; each has a title and labeled axes.

Reproducibility

A correct requirements.txt file created using pip freeze is included.

Cleaning Justification

Student clearly explains why cleaning steps were necessary and what issues they addressed.

Visualization Interpretation

Each visualization includes a brief, accurate interpretation of what the plot shows.

Summary & Interpretation

Final summary describes insights, patterns, assumptions, and limitations in complete sentences.

Bias Awareness

README includes a thoughtful response explaining where poor data cleaning could introduce bias.

Notebook includes required sections (Setup, Ingestion, Cleaning, EDA, Visualizations, Summary) with clear markdown headings.

All student-defined functions include informative docstrings; code formatting is readable.

README includes a project description, reproducibility instructions, and complete responses to all reflection questions.

Git/GitHub Usage

Repository includes multiple commits and at least one additional branch beyond main.

Future Integration Reflections

README includes complete answers on ML workflow changes, neural network preparation, and agentic automation potential.

Workflow Completeness

Submission resembles a professional, reusable data workflow appropriate as a foundation for ML/DL projects.

